_articles/belin.md, before:

---
title: "Bêlin ach Adhghavûê // Belinus and Assumptions"
category: Deities
layout: default
---

**Etymology:**

The etymology of the divine name *Belinus* is frought with muddy waters. It is a topic in Celtic philology that is surrounded by intense controversy and many misplaced assumptions. When drawing information from less linguistically savvy "dictionaries" of Celtic mythology, it seems that many claim the origin of Belinus from a root \**b<sup>h</sup>el-* meaning 'shine'.\[1] This interpretation is incontestably the most widespread and, likely also incontestably, the least correct. Delamarre, widely viewed by many as the leading expert in Continental Celtic linguistics, refutes this interpretation, least of all the reasons being that the cognates often cited to help justify it consitently mean 'white, grey, or pale', not 'luminous'.\[2]

Besides the most common and misinformed etymology mentioned above, there is also de Bernardo Stempel's suggestion, which she reinforced (as most recent as I could access) in 2013. She claims the origin of *Belinus* from an IE root \**g<sup>w</sup>élH-e-n* meaning 'spring'.\[3] Apparently, according to de Bernardo Stempel with some support among Šašel Kos, this interpretation relating Belinus to water is supported epigraphically.\[4]

It has also been claimed, although the claim is probably not worth much of note, that *Belinus* is derived ultimately from a name for the plant henbane.\[5]

Crucial to the understanding of Belinus, though, is also understanding the heavy criticism that these previous etymological analyses have recently begun to face. BM Prosper, in a piece devoted to Belinus, seeks to illustrate these points by drawing attention to the clinical habit of scholars to misappropriately define *Belenus* as the default form of this theonym instead of *Belinus*, partially due to a long-standing bias stemming from use of *Belenus* in Latin primary sources as well as the disproportionate use of *Belenus* in Latin dedications, in which he is popularly synchronised with Apollo. This seemingly innocent assumption could potentially have long-standing consequences. It leads to misreadings of inscriptions '*B(-)*' as '*B(elenus)*', even though they just as easily could have been meant as '*B(elinus)*'. It is also possible that this assumption affected sources such as the *Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum*, which are often used for etymological studies. In terms of bias, either unconscious or otherwise, the piece takes issue with, above all else, the apparent cherry-picking of potential etymologies for *Belinus* to support the already widely-held belief that he is related, either in function or in name or in both, to Apollo. This is apparent in the, however unlikely, etymologization of the theonym as deriving ultimately from either 'bright', as is widely incorrectly believed, or from 'spring' as per de Bernardo Stempel. Prosper's article also takes linguistic issue with several of the aformentioned etymologies. Chief among them is the complicated and unlikely timeline of evolution that de Bernardo Stempel must give in her explanation of \**g<sup>w</sup>élH-e-n* to account for all manner of exceptions. Instead, Prosper seems to favor the explanation of Delamarre that the default form of the theonym should be *Belinus* and that the likely root for *Belinus* is \**bel-* or \**belo-*, meaning something to the tune of 'strength' or 'power'. This interpretation seems to be reinforced by Šašel Kos in her claim that the theonym appears *only* as *Belinus* within Noricum and likely spread to popularity from Noricum before becoming Latinized as *Belenus*.\[6]\[7]

**Sources**

1. The irreducible Gauls used to swear by Belenos. – Or did they? Celtic religion, henbane and historical misapprehensions by Blanca María Prósper, 2017, in Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie, Volume 64, Issue 1, p. 286

2. Dictionnaire de la Langue Gauloise by Xavier Delamarre, 2003, p. 72

3. Celtic and Other Indigenous Divine Names Found in the Italian Peninsula by Patrizia de Bernardo Stempel, 2013, in Théonymie celtique, cultes, interpretatio - Keltische Theonymie, Kulte, Interpretatio, p. 79

4. Belin by Marjeta Šašel Kos, 2001, in Studia Mythologica Slavica IV, p. 13 & Celtic and Other Indigenous Divine Names Found in the Italian Peninsula by Patrizia de Bernardo Stempel, 2013, in Théonymie celtique, cultes, interpretatio - Keltische Theonymie, Kulte, Interpretatio, p. 79

5. On Henbane and Early European Narcotics by Peter Schrijver, 1999, in Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie, Volume 51, Issue 1, p. 27

6. Belin by Marjeta Šašel Kos, 2001, in Studia Mythologica Slavica IV, p. 10

7. The irreducible Gauls used to swear by Belenos. – Or did they? Celtic religion, henbane and historical misapprehensions by Blanca María Prósper, 2017, in Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie, Volume 64, Issue 1, p. 255–298

Commit message:

Some structural site work, more work on Belinus article.

_articles/belin.md, after:

---
title: "Bêlin ach Adhghavûê // Belinus and Assumptions"
category: Deities
layout: default
---

**Etymology:**

The etymology of the divine name *Belinus* is frought with muddy waters. It is a topic in Celtic philology that is surrounded by intense controversy and many misplaced assumptions. When drawing information from less linguistically savvy "dictionaries" of Celtic mythology, it seems that many claim the origin of Belinus from a root \**b<sup>h</sup>el-* meaning 'shine'.\[1] This interpretation is incontestably the most widespread and, likely also incontestably, the least correct. Delamarre, widely viewed by many as the leading expert in Continental Celtic linguistics, refutes this interpretation, least of all the reasons being that the cognates often cited to help justify it consitently mean 'white, grey, or pale', not 'luminous'.\[2]

Besides the most common and misinformed etymology mentioned above, there is also de Bernardo Stempel's suggestion, which she reinforced (as most recent as I could access) in 2013. She claims the origin of *Belinus* from an IE root \**g<sup>w</sup>élH-e-n* meaning 'spring'.\[3] Apparently, according to de Bernardo Stempel with some support among Šašel Kos, this interpretation relating Belinus to water is supported epigraphically.\[4]

It has also been claimed that *Belinus* is derived ultimately from a name for the plant henbane, although this theory has found itself in an uphill battle against other more likely etymologies as of late.\[5]

Crucial to the understanding of Belinus, though, is also understanding the heavy criticism that these previous etymological analyses have recently begun to face. BM Prosper, in a piece devoted to Belinus, seeks to illustrate these points by drawing attention to the clinical habit of scholars to misappropriately define *Belenus* as the default form of this theonym instead of *Belinus*, partially due to a long-standing bias stemming from use of *Belenus* in Latin primary sources as well as the disproportionate use of *Belenus* in Latin dedications, in which he is popularly synchronised with Apollo. This seemingly innocent assumption could potentially have long-standing consequences. It leads to misreadings of inscriptions '*B(-)*' as '*B(elenus)*', even though they just as easily could have been meant as '*B(elinus)*'. It is also possible that this assumption affected sources such as the *Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum*, which are often used for philological studies. In terms of bias, either unconscious or otherwise, Prosper takes issue with, above all else, the apparent cherry-picking of potential etymologies for *Belinus* to support the already widely-held belief that He is related, either in function or in name or in both, to Apollo. This is apparent in the, however unlikely, etymologization of the theonym as deriving ultimately from either 'bright', as is widely incorrectly believed, or from 'spring' as per de Bernardo Stempel. Both of these suggestions, the theories' supporters claim, are supported by Belinus' supposed assimilation with the Roman god of the sun and of healing. For Prosper, however, these theories are the result of an academic confirmation bias, finding support only amoing Belinus' connection with Apollo and ignoring certain other linguistic factors. Prosper's article also takes linguistic issue with several of the aformentioned etymologies. Chief among them is the complicated and unlikely timeline of evolution that de Bernardo Stempel must give in her explanation of \**g<sup>w</sup>élH-e-n* to account for all manner of exceptions. Instead, Prosper seems to favor the explanation of Delamarre that the default form of the theonym should be *Belinus* and that the likely root for *Belinus* is \**bel-* or \**belo-*, meaning something to the tune of 'strength' or 'power'. This interpretation seems to be reinforced by Šašel Kos in her claim that the theonym appears *only* as *Belinus* within Noricum and likely spread to popularity from Noricum before becoming Latinized as *Belenus*.\[6]\[7]

**Sources**

1. The irreducible Gauls used to swear by Belenos. – Or did they? Celtic religion, henbane and historical misapprehensions by Blanca María Prósper, 2017, in Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie, Volume 64, Issue 1, p. 286

2. Dictionnaire de la Langue Gauloise by Xavier Delamarre, 2003, p. 72

3. Celtic and Other Indigenous Divine Names Found in the Italian Peninsula by Patrizia de Bernardo Stempel, 2013, in Théonymie celtique, cultes, interpretatio - Keltische Theonymie, Kulte, Interpretatio, p. 79

4. Belin by Marjeta Šašel Kos, 2001, in Studia Mythologica Slavica IV, p. 13 & Celtic and Other Indigenous Divine Names Found in the Italian Peninsula by Patrizia de Bernardo Stempel, 2013, in Théonymie celtique, cultes, interpretatio - Keltische Theonymie, Kulte, Interpretatio, p. 79

5. On Henbane and Early European Narcotics by Peter Schrijver, 1999, in Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie, Volume 51, Issue 1, p. 27

6. Belin by Marjeta Šašel Kos, 2001, in Studia Mythologica Slavica IV, p. 10

7. The irreducible Gauls used to swear by Belenos. – Or did they? Celtic religion, henbane and historical misapprehensions by Blanca María Prósper, 2017, in Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie, Volume 64, Issue 1, p. 255–298
